**Sensitive Data Labeling (PII Detection)**
- **Limited Categories**: The pre-trained labeler only recognizes a fixed set of entity types (e.g. PERSON, ADDRESS, IP address, SSN, credit card, etc.), labeling anything outside these as UNKNOWN or “BACKGROUND”. This assumes all sensitive data in your dataset falls into those predefined categories, so unusual or domain-specific sensitive fields might not be detected without custom models.
- **Pattern & Data Bias**: The model is trained on typical patterns for those categories (often U.S.-centric formats). It may miss or misclassify data that doesn’t match those learned patterns (e.g. an international phone number or name in another language), leading to false negatives (assumption). In other words, the labeler assumes inputs follow familiar formats – if not, it might simply tag them as UNKNOWN by default.
- **False Positives from Format Matching**: Detection is largely pattern-based, so non-sensitive data that coincidentally fits a regex or format might be mislabeled as sensitive (assumption). For example, a 16-digit inventory code could be flagged as a credit card number if it resembles that pattern. The labeler does not truly validate the content (e.g. no checksum for credit card), so it might over-identify sensitive info based on superficial traits.
- **Context Limitations**: The default labeler uses a character-level CNN model, meaning it looks at character sequences in isolation. This approach lacks higher-level context, so it can mislabel out-of-context text (assumption). For instance, a common first name in a random string might always be tagged as a PERSON even if it isn’t actually a person’s name in that context. The algorithm doesn’t incorporate surrounding semantics like a full NLP named-entity recognizer might.
- **Heavy Model & Dependency Assumptions**: DataProfiler’s labeler relies on a deep learning model (TensorFlow-based) which is static unless you retrain or extend it. It assumes the proper ML dependencies are installed; otherwise the labeler won’t load or could error out. Performance-wise, running the model on every value can be expensive, so by default the profiler only scans a sample of the data for sensitive entities to save time. This sampling assumes the sample is sufficient to catch most sensitive fields – if sensitive values are sparse or missed in the sample, the labeler could under-report (assumption).

**Data Profiling (Statistical Profiling)**:
- **Type Inference Pitfalls**: The profiling algorithm infers each column’s data type, but this inference can be wrong if the data is ambiguous. One known issue is that numeric-looking strings may be misclassified as numbers. For example, a column of IDs like "01321", "07618", ... (stored as text with leading zeros) was profiled as type int and given numerical stats. The profiler assumed that any value parseable as a number is truly numeric, which in this case was a false assumption – it treated an identifier as a meaningful integer.
- **Categorical vs. Continuous Heuristics**: DataProfiler makes assumptions about whether a column is categorical (limited distinct values) or continuous. It uses thresholds on the fraction of unique values, etc., to decide this. This can be misleading. For example, an ID field with many unique entries might be treated as a continuous numeric feature instead of a category, causing the profiler to compute meaningless statistics like average or standard deviation on it. (In the issue above, a nearly unique ID was profiled with min/max/mean, which didn’t make sense for an identifier.) The underlying assumption is that a high unique count implies a numeric measure rather than an enumerated code – an assumption that breaks for identifier-type data.
- **Sampling Trade-off in Profiling**: By default, the profiler may not process an entire huge dataset for efficiency. It can sample a subset of rows for computations (to limit memory and runtime). This assumes the sample is representative of the whole data. If there are outliers or infrequent patterns not captured in the sample, metrics like min/max, duplicates count, or histograms could be off. In other words, the profiler might “miss” characteristics of the data unless you increase the sampling ratio or disable sampling, which is a manual adjustment based on the user’s knowledge of the data size (assumption based on design).
- **Statistical Distribution Limits**: The profiler generates basic statistics (mean, quantiles, skew, etc.) and histograms with equally spaced bins across the data range. If the data distribution is skewed or contains extreme outliers, the results can be hard to interpret. For instance, one column’s profile showed a very large max value that caused most histogram bins to be empty (zero counts in many bins). The profiler does not automatically adjust for such skews (e.g. no log-scale or outlier truncation in its analysis), so it assumes a relatively even distribution. Highly skewed data or long tails may yield stats that don’t summarize the “typical” data well (assumption).
- **Context-Free Analysis**: The profiling is done per column (plus some dataset-wide aggregates like correlations and duplicate row counts). It does not understand relationships or meaning beyond the raw values. For example, it can flag two columns as highly correlated or identical, but it won’t recognize if one is, say, a code that maps to categories in another – that interpretation is up to the user. It also doesn’t catch semantic issues (like if dates and ages don’t align) because it assumes each column’s statistics speak for themselves. This lack of holistic context is an inherent limitation (assumption acknowledged: design focuses on direct statistics).
- **Handling of Edge Cases**: Certain data formats and mixed-content columns present challenges. The profiler has specific logic for common types (ints, floats, dates, etc.), but unusual formats might slip through. For example, a non-standard date string might not be recognized as datetime at all, or might be mis-parsed. Similarly, if a column contains free-text comments or mixed types, the structured profiler will just treat it as a generic string without deep analysis. The tool assumes each column has a uniform type/purpose; if a column’s contents are heterogeneous or unstructured, the results will be less meaningful (assumption inferred from design).
